
Linux Commands

1.	File and Directory Operations:

  ls:- List files and directories in the current directory.
        Eg: ls, ls /path/to/directory , ls -l
		
  cd:- Change the current directory.
        Eg: cd /path/to/directory, cd ~ (HOME DIR), cd - (previous directory) , cd ../../..
		
  pwd:- Print the current working directory.
  touch:- Create an empty file.
          Eg : touch myfile.txt
		  
  mkdir:- Create a new directory.
        Eg: mkdir my_directory , mkdir -p /path/to/new  directory (use -p flag)
		
  rm:- Remove files or directories.
       Eg: mv olddir/ newdir/ , rm -r my_directory/ , rm -i myfile.txt
	   
  cp:- Copy files or directories.
        Eg: cp sourcefile.txt destination/ (Copy a file to a new location) , cp -r sourcedir/ destination/ (Recursively)
		
  mv:- Move or rename files or directories.
       Eg: mv oldfile.txt newfile.txt , mv olddir/ newdir/
       
  cat:- Concatenate and display file content (cat, less, more):
       Eg: cat myfile.txt , 
  head and tail:- Display the beginning or end of a file.
      Eg: head myfile.txt (First 10 Lines), head -n 20 myfile.txt (First 20 Lines) , head file1.txt file2.txt(First 10 Lines )
	      Some command | head (View the First Few Lines of a Command's Output (Piped)).
		  
	  Eg: tail myfile.txt (last 10 Lines), tail -n 20 myfile.txt (last 20 Lines) , tail file1.txt file2.txt(last 10 Lines )
	      Some command | tail (View the last Few Lines of a Command's Output (Piped)).
		  
  find:- Search for files and directories.
       Eg: find . -name myfile.txt  , find . -type f -mtime -7 (Search for files modified within the last 7 days)
	   
  grep:- Search for patterns in text.
       Eg: grep "pattern" file.txt  , grep -i "pattern" file.txt (-i:- Case-Insensitive, -n:- Display Line Numbers with Matching Lines, -o:- Display Only Matching Text)
	   
  chmod:- Change file permissions.
      Eg: chmod 755 file.txt , chmod u+rw,go+r file.txt
	  
     Octal Notation:

     In octal notation, each digit represents the permission for a different user group: owner, group, and others.

     4 corresponds to read permission (r).
     2 corresponds to write permission (w).
     1 corresponds to execute permission (x).
     Here's how you can use octal notation to set permissions:

      0: No permission (---)
      1: Execute permission (--x)
      2: Write permission (-w-)
      3: Write and execute permissions (-wx)
      4: Read permission (r--)
      5: Read and execute permissions (r-x)
      6: Read and write permissions (rw-)
      7: Read, write, and execute permissions (rwx)
	  
	  Symbolic Notation:

      In symbolic notation, you specify permissions for each user group using letters and symbols.

      u: User (owner)
      g: Group
      o: Others
      a: All (equivalent to ugo)
      +: Add permissions
      -: Remove permissions
      =: Set permissions
      Here's how you can use symbolic notation to modify permissions:

      u+rw: Add read and write permissions for the user.
      go-rx: Remove read and execute permissions for the group and others.
      a=rx: Set read and execute permissions for all (equivalent to chmod +rx).
  
  chown:- Change file ownership.
        Eg:     chown -R newowner directory/
  df:- Display disk space usage.
     Eg: df -h (Human-Readable Format) , df -i (Display Inode Usage)
  
  du:- Show directory space usage.
    Eg: du -h /path/to/directory (Display Disk Usage for a Directory and Its Subdirectories)
        
2. File Content Manipulation:
    
  nano, vim, emacs:- Text editors for creating and editing files.
     1.Open a File for Editing:
	   Eg: nano myfile.txt
	   
	 2. Save Changes:

         Press Ctrl + O.
         Confirm the file name and press Enter.
     3. Exit Nano:

         Press Ctrl + X.
         If there are unsaved changes, Nano will prompt you to save them.
     4. Navigate within the File:

         Use arrow keys for navigation.
         Use Page Up and Page Down to scroll.
         Use Ctrl + V for page down and Ctrl + Y for page up.  
	
     5. Select and Copy Text:

         Position the cursor at the beginning of the text.
         Press Ctrl + Shift + 6 to start selecting.
         Use arrow keys to highlight the text.
         Press Ctrl + K to cut the selected text.
         Move to the desired location and press Ctrl + U to paste the cut text.	
		 
	 6. Search for Text:

         Press Ctrl + W to initiate a search.
         Enter the search term and press Enter.
         Use Ctrl + W to find the next occurrence.
     7. Replace Text:

         Press Ctrl + \ to initiate a search and replace.
         Enter the search term and press Enter.
         Enter the replacement text and press Enter to replace the first occurrence.
         To replace all occurrences, press A (for "All").
     8. Undo and Redo:

         Press Ctrl + Shift + 6 to start selecting.
         Use arrow keys to highlight the text you want to cut.
         Press Ctrl + K to cut the text.
         To undo, press Ctrl + Shift + 6 again.
         To redo, press Ctrl + U to paste the previously cut text.	 
  vim:-
  ------
     1. Open a File for Editing:
	     Eg: vim myfile.txt
	 2. Save Changes:

         In normal mode, press : to enter command mode.
         Type w to save changes.
         To save and exit, type wq and press Enter.
     3. Exit Vim:

         In normal mode, press : to enter command mode.
         Type q to quit without saving.
         To force exit without saving, type q!.
         To save and exit, type wq and press Enter.
     4. Navigate within the File:

         Use arrow keys for navigation.
         Use j and k for up and down.
         Use Ctrl + F for page down and Ctrl + B for page up.
     5. Select and Copy Text:

         Position the cursor at the beginning of the text.
         Enter visual mode by pressing v.
         Use arrow keys to highlight the text.
         Press y to copy (yank) the selected text.
         Move to the desired location and press p to paste.	
	 6. Search for Text:

         In normal mode, press / to initiate a search.
         Enter the search term and press Enter.
         Use n to find the next occurrence and N to find the previous one.
     7. Replace Text:

         In normal mode, press : to enter command mode.
         Type %s/searchterm/replacement/g to replace all occurrences of "searchterm" with "replacement."
     8. Undo and Redo:

         In normal mode, press u to undo the last action.
         To redo, press Ctrl + r.	 
	   


  less or more:- View file content page by page.
       Eg: less myfile.txt , more myfile.txt
	   
  wc:- Count lines, words, and characters in a file.
       Eg: wc filename.txt , wc -l filename.txt (To count only the number of lines in a file)
	   
  sed:- Stream editor for text manipulation.
      Eg: sed 's/apple/banana/' filename.txt 
	  
  awk:- Text processing tool for pattern matching and data extraction.
      Eg: awk -F',' '{print $2}' filename.csv
 
3. Process Management:

  ps:- List running processes.
     Eg: ps , ps aux
	 
  top or htop:- Monitor system resource usage and running processes.
      Eg: top  , htop
	  
  kill:- Terminate processes by process ID (PID).
     Eg: kill PID
	 
  pkill:- Terminate processes by name.
     Eg: pkill myapp
  
  killall:- Terminate processes by name.
     Eg: killall myprocess (Terminate all processes named "myprocess.")


4. System Information:

  uname:- Display system information.
    Eg: uname -a (Display the system's kernel name, version, and architecture)
	
  hostname:- Display or set the system's hostname.
    Eg: hostname
	
  uptime:- Show system uptime.
     Eg: uptime (Display system uptime and load averages)
  
  free:- Display system memory usage.
      Eg: free -h
  
  df and du:- Disk space usage.
     Eg: df -h 
  
  lscpu:- Display CPU information.
  lsblk:- List block devices.  
  
  cat /etc/os-release :- Display information about the operating system and distribution.
  
5. User and Group Management:

  who:- Display currently logged-in users.
     Eg: who , who -a (Display a more detailed list of currently logged-in users, including terminal, login time, and remote IP addresses)  
	 
  w:- Show who is logged in and what they are doing.
      Eg: w, w –h (Display user information and the header line to provide context)
	  
  id:- Display user and group information.
      Eg: id , id username (Display information for a specific user)

  useradd and userdel:- Add and delete users.
     Eg: sudo useradd john
	 
  passwd:- Change user passwords.
     Eg: sudo passwd john
	 
  groupadd and groupdel:- Add and delete groups.
     Eg: sudo groupadd developers (Create a new group named "developers")

6. Network and Connectivity:

  ifconfig or ip:- Display network interfaces and configure network settings.
     Eg: ifconfig/ip address show (ifconfigDisplay information for all network interfaces.)
	 
  ping:- Send ICMP echo requests to a host.
     Eg: ping google.com (Ping a remote host)
	  
  netstat or ss:- Display network statistics.
     Eg: netstat -tuln (Display all active network connections.) , netstat -rn (Display routing table information)
	 
  ssh:- Securely connect to remote servers.
  scp:- Securely copy files between hosts.
  wget or curl:- Download files from the internet.
    Eg: wget https://example.com/file.zip
	
  nc:- Netcat, a versatile networking utility for TCP and UDP.  
  
7. Package Management (Package Managers Vary by Linux Distribution):

  apt (Debian/Ubuntu)
     Used in: Debian, Ubuntu, and their derivatives.
     Commands:
       apt-get: Used for package installation, updates, and removal.
       apt-cache: Used to search for packages and display package information.
       dpkg: The underlying package management tool that APT relies on for low-level operations.
   
  yum (Red Hat/CentOS)
     Used in: CentOS, Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), Fedora, and their derivatives.
       Commands:
         yum install: Used for package installation.
         yum update: Used for updating installed packages.
         yum remove: Used for package removal.
		 
  dnf (Fedora)
  
     Used in: Fedora, CentOS 8 and later, RHEL 8 and later.
       Commands:
         dnf install: Used for package installation.
         dnf update: Used for updating installed packages.
         dnf remove: Used for package removal.
		 
  zypper (openSUSE)
  
    ZYpp (ZENworks Package Management):

      Used in: openSUSE, SUSE Linux Enterprise, and their derivatives.
        Commands:
          zypper in: Used for package installation.
          zypper up: Used for updating installed packages.
          zypper rm: Used for package removal.
		  
  pacman (Arch Linux)
  
    Pacman:

      Used in: Arch Linux and Arch-based distributions.
        Commands:
          pacman -S: Used for package installation.
          pacman -Syu: Used for updating the system and installed packages.
          pacman -R: Used for package removal.
  
  
8. File Compression and Archiving:

  tar: Create and extract tar archives.
     Eg: Create a tar archive: tar -cvf archive.tar files_or_directories
         Extract a tar archive: tar -xvf archive.tar
		 
  gzip, bzip2, xz: Compress and decompress files.
    Eg: Compress a file: gzip filename
        Decompress a gzip file: gunzip filename.gz
		
  zip and unzip: Create and extract zip archives. 
     Eg: Create a Zip archive: zip -r archive.zip files_or_directories
         Extract a Zip archive: unzip archive.zip

9. Shell Scripting:

  bash, sh:- Execute shell scripts.
  chmod +x:- Make a script executable.
  ./script.sh:- Run a shell script.  

